docs(vault): add deriveContextHash wallet API specification (#1352)
babylonlabs-io/babylon-toolkit: docs/specs/derive-context-hash.md

> # `deriveContextHash` Specification

Reviewer: Let's wrap the markdown files to 80 char lines

**Spec revision**: 0.8-draft
**Algorithm version**: 0 (salt: `"derive-context-hash"`, no suffix)
**Date**: 2026-04-02
**Authors**: Jerome Wang (Babylon Labs)
**Status**: Draft — pending auditor review

---

## Abstract

`deriveContextHash` is a wallet API method that derives a deterministic 32-byte value from the wallet's key material and an application-provided context string. It uses HKDF-SHA-256 (RFC 5869) and is designed for cross-wallet compatibility — any conforming implementation produces the same output for the same key material and context.

The method is generic. The wallet has no knowledge of what the derived value is used for. dApps provide an opaque context and receive a deterministic output.

---

## 1. Motivation

> dApps sometimes need a deterministic secret tied to the user's wallet — one that can be reproduced across sessions and devices without manual storage. Examples include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications need a deterministic secret tied to the user's wallet — one that can be reproduced across sessions and devices without manual storage. Examples include:
```

    - `title` — short label for the operation (e.g. `"Vault Deposit Secret"`).
    - `description` — longer explanation of what the derived value will be used for (e.g. `"Derive a secret for vault deposit activation"`).

**Returns:**
- Hex-encoded 32-byte derived value (64 lowercase hex characters).

**Errors:**
- Context is empty, odd-length, contains non-hex characters (including uppercase `A–F`), has a `0x` prefix, or exceeds 1024 bytes (2048 hex characters).
- User rejects the approval dialog.
- Wallet does not support the method.

**User approval required.** The wallet MUST show a confirmation dialog before deriving and returning the value. The dialog SHOULD display the requesting origin. If `display` is provided, the wallet SHOULD show the title and description to help the user understand what they are approving.

### 2.2 Derivation Algorithm

```
ikm    = BIP-32 private key at path m/44'/0'/0'/60888'
salt   = "derive-context-hash"                   (UTF-8 encoded)
info   = context                                  (raw bytes, decoded from hex input)
length = 32

output = HKDF-SHA-256(ikm, salt, info, length)
```

> **IKM (Input Key Material):** The raw 32-byte private key scalar at BIP-32 derivation path `m/44'/0'/0'/60888'` (all indices hardened), using standard BIP-32 derivation on secp256k1. This is the 32-byte big-endian scalar `k` only — excluding chain code, depth, fingerprint, child number, and any serialization prefix. If BIP-32 derivation at any level produces an invalid child key (IL ≥ curve order or resulting key is zero), the wallet MUST return an error rather than skip to the next index.

Author: > I think we should have different number on this part of the derivation path.

which value shall we use? @KonradStaniec

# `deriveContextHash` Specification

**Spec revision**: 1.0
**Algorithm version**: 0 (salt: `"derive-context-hash"`, no suffix)
**Date**: 2026-04-07
**Authors**: Jerome Wang (Babylon Labs)
**Status**: Draft — incorporates auditor feedback (Coinspect)

---

## Abstract

`deriveContextHash` is a wallet API method that derives a
deterministic 32-byte value from the wallet's key material, an
application name, and an application-provided context string. It
uses HKDF-SHA-256 (RFC 5869) and is designed for cross-wallet
compatibility — any conforming implementation produces the same
output for the same key material, application name, and context.

The method is generic. The wallet has no knowledge of what the
derived value is used for. dApps provide an application name and
an opaque context; the wallet displays the application name in
its approval dialog and returns a deterministic output.

---

## 1. Motivation

dApps sometimes need a deterministic secret tied to the user's
wallet — one that can be reproduced across sessions and devices
without manual storage. Examples include:

> - **HTLC preimages** — commit a hash at deposit time, reveal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **hashlock preimages** — commit a hash at deposit time, reveal
```
HTLC includes the term "timelock".

Also, here we are referring to "deposit time", "complete activation", both of which are specific to our app. We could say "Hashlock pre-images -- commit to a secret that can be later revealed"
